### 2 Roar History

In 2011 Penn State established an intra-university Cyberscience Task-Force to develop a strategic and coherent vision for cyberscience at the university. On the recommendations of this task-force, the Institute for CyberScience was established in 2012\. ICDS is one of seven interdisciplinary research institutes under the Office of the Senior Vice President for Research. Peer institutes include the Huck Institutes of the Life Sciences, the Materials Research Institute, the Institutes of Energy and the Environment, the Social Science Research Institute, the Cancer Research Institute, and the Clinical and Translational Science Institute.  

Under its first director, Padma Raghavan, the institute began a cluster hiring initiative in 2012-2013, in partnership with Penn State colleges and institutes. This initiative, the [ICDS Co-hire program](https://www.icds.psu.edu/about/icds-co-hires/), brought in promising computational experts from a range of fields.  

In 2014 Executive Vice President and Provost Nick Jones and Vice President for Research Neil Sharkey initiated a series of steps designed to help Penn State deliver the broad spectrum of computing and data services that are required to advance research. As part of this ongoing process, ICDS continues to develop and sustain advanced cyberinfrastructure, with the goal of accelerating research outcomes by enhancing researcher productivity. In 2019, the institute was renamed to be the Institute for Computational and Data Sciences. In 2020, the supercomputer (formerly named the Institute for Computational and Data Sciences Advanced Cyber Infrastructure, or ICDS-ACI) was renamed Roar.

